If you watch the news during
a presidential election,
you’ll hear a lot of this:
“What do the national polls look like?”
“Hillary Clinton’s national lead…”
“Nationally, Joe Biden is currently ahead.”
But these national polls don’t
actually tell you who’s going to win.
“Throw the national polls out the window,
they don’t matter at all.
What matters are those swing states.”
Ah yes. The swing states.
Most democracies around the world
elect their head of state with a popular vote:
So, whoever gets the most votes wins.
But in America we do it a little differently.
The US is the only country
that picks its president
using something called the Electoral College.
It’s made up of delegates from each US state.
When Americans vote for president,
what they’re actually voting for,
is who their state will vote for.
This is why, every so often,
someone wins the presidency
without winning the popular vote.
That’s happened twice
in just the past 20 years.
The majority of Americans do not like this
system, and haven’t for a long time.
Both political parties have made attempts
to get rid of it.
So why does the US
still use the Electoral College?
And who actually benefits from it?
The Electoral College is based on
how people are represented in Congress:
where each state has a number of
representatives based on its population,
and every state also gets two senators.
So, for example, let’s look at Texas, which
has a huge population,
and Vermont, which has a really small one.
Texas has 36 representatives in Congress.
Vermont only gets one.
Representatives in both states
each represent
roughly the same number of people.
In the Electoral College, a state gets the
same number of delegates
as their Congressional representatives, plus
two — for each senator.
So Texas has 38 electoral votes.
Vermont has 3.
But this combination makes the number
of people each delegate represents
way different between states:
In Texas, one electoral delegate represents
three times the amount of people
as one in Vermont.
And that makes each individual person’s
vote in Vermont a lot more influential.
The Electoral College creates
discrepancies like this all over the country.
A voter in Wyoming is worth three and a half
times as much as a voter in California.
The winner of the presidential election is
the candidate who gets 270 or more
of these Electoral College votes.
These are the results of the 2016 election,
by state.
You’re probably more familiar with this version
of it: a map of red states, and blue states.
But this chart tells a different story. You can
see that no state is actually all-red or all-blue.
But almost every state awards its electoral
votes the same way:
The candidate who gets the most votes
in a state, gets ALL its electoral votes.
If they win the state by 1%, they win 100%
of the electoral votes.
In 2016, more than 4 million people
voted for Donald Trump in California.
In fact, more people voted for him there
than in any other state except for two.
But it didn’t matter. Hillary Clinton got
more votes there,
so she got all 55 of its electoral votes.
Clinton never even campaigned in California.
Polling showed she’d easily win the state.
Trump only visited Texas once; he knew he
basically had that state’s electoral votes locked.
But they both visited Florida,
35 or more times.
That’s because Florida
is usually a “swing state”:
Polls show that the vote there could swing
to one party or another in nearly every election.
Trump only won it in 2016 by 100,000 votes,
out of more than 9 million.
Swing states have changed over time, thanks
to shifting demographics and political views.
And it’s states like these
where presidential candidates
spend most of their time campaigning.
It also means these states have way more
influence over the election than these ones.
A study found that voters in Michigan had 51 times
the amount of influence on the 2016 election
as someone from a state like Utah.
Voters in states like California, or Missouri,
mattered very little.
Swing states are where the election actually
takes place.
They get the attention and the influence.
And they only exist
because of the Electoral College.
It doesn’t seem very fair.
But the Electoral College
has always shifted power
away from some people
and towards others.
It’s how it was designed.
Back when there were
just a few states, not 50,
they had to get all the states to agree on
the Constitution.
One problem: The Northern states, which were
largely anti-slavery,
wanted only free people to count in the population towards electoral votes.
Which they had more of.
The pro-slavery Southern states were worried
that they would be constantly outvoted,
and wanted enslaved people to count
in determining the population.
As a compromise, they settled on
something called the “three-fifths clause.“
It established that an enslaved person
would only count as 3/5 of a person.
In 1800, Pennsylvania, a northern state,
and Virginia, a southern one,
had about the same number
of free people living there.
But Virginia was also home to hundreds
of thousands of enslaved people,
who had no freedom,
let alone a vote,
and ended up with more votes
in the Electoral College than Pennsylvania.
That year, those extra electoral votes gave
the candidate from Virginia just enough to win.
Even after the US finally abolished slavery,
and eventually gave Black Americans
the right to vote,
White Southern leaders found ways to keep
them from voting,
like with discriminating laws like poll taxes,
and acts of violence.
This meant they continued to have
overrepresentation in the Electoral College
on behalf of a large population
that couldn’t vote.
The first time Congress attempted to replace
the Electoral College with a simple popular vote
was back in 1816.
But senators from Southern states blocked it,
saying it would be “deeply injurious”
to them.
In 1969, Congress came even closer:
replacing the Electoral College had support
in both parties,
and even passed the House.
But it was blocked again by Southern senators.
A senator from Alabama wrote,
“The Electoral College is one of the South’s
few remaining political safeguards.
Let’s keep it.”
Why change a system that historically had,
and still was benefiting White Southerners?
Today, the states that the Electoral College
benefits have changed,
but it’s still making some voters
more powerful than others.
If we look at the states with a lot of electoral
votes, for not a lot of people,
and the states with a little electoral votes,
for a lot of people,
these states are a lot whiter
and less diverse than the rest of America.
And many of these states
are Republican strongholds.
These tend to vote Democratic.
That’s one reason the two most recent Republican presidents
have won the Electoral College
without winning the popular vote.
And since it’s currently Democrats that are
primarily disadvantaged by the Electoral College,
they’re the ones leading the charge
to replace it with a popular vote.
“Get rid of the Electoral College, and every
vote counts.”
But as politics have changed, the people most
critical of the Electoral College have, too.
In the 1948 presidential election,
New York ended up being the major swing state.
A Congressman from Texas said, “I have no
objection to the Negro in Harlem voting.
But I do resent the fact that his vote is worth
a hundred times as much...
as the vote of a white man in Texas.”
Swing states change.
What doesn’t, is that the Electoral College gives
certain people more power to pick the president.
And its biggest defenders have always
been those who benefit the most from it.